\labelledsec{Aspect Orientation in Simulation \& Modelling}{ao_and_modelling}

% Aspect orientation as it applies to modelling

Having discussed aspect orientation as it is used in a simulation context, it is
natural to investigate its use in modelling research, too.

Simulation and modelling are similar topics and are often combined into a single
study. However, their goals differ. Simulation typically involves the study of
processes or behaviour: there is an expectation that simulations are
\emph{executed} or \emph{run}. This often produces data. The intent of modelling
is more structural in nature: models are typically observed or analysed to gain
insights. Quoting \citeauthor{smintro}'s introduction~\cite{smintro}:

\begin{displayquote}
    Modeling \emph{[sic]} is the process of producing a model; a model
    is a representation of the construction and working of
    some system of interest. A model is similar to but
    simpler than the system it represents.
    \newline{}
    [ \ldots{} ]
    \newline{}
    A simulation of a system is the operation of a model of the system. The
    model can be reconfigured and experimented with; usually, this is
    impossible, too expensive or impractical to do in the system it represents.
    The operation of the model can be studied, and hence, properties concerning
    the behavior of the actual system or its subsystem can be inferred.
\end{displayquote}

\citeauthor{smintro}'s definition implies that to simulate is to operate a
model. Whether this model is constructed for the purpose of simulation or for
study in its own right, a simplified representation of the system being studied
is implicitly required for any simulation. However, modelling does not imply
simulation. Models can be studied for their own merits, and many modelling
frameworks exist which are made explicitly for their own study, without regard
to their use in simulation\footnote{Consider UML, a well-studied modelling
framework which is generally not used for any kind of simulation --- depending
on its use, it often cannot be --- and for which many alternatives now exist
specifically to address this
limitation~\cite{opm_original,ExecutableBPMNMitsyuk}.\inline{surely one more
here to round this out.}}. Aspect orientation has seen some study in modelling,
particularly for \sociotechnical modelling, and while aspect-oriented
\sociotechnical modelling is not generally researched with subsequent simulation
in mind, an important body of work is still present, and therefore important to
discuss.

\subsection{Aspect Orientation in Business Process Modelling}
Aspect orientation for \sociotechnical systems is particularly well studied in
the business process modelling
community\cite{Machado_2011,Cappelli_AOBPM}~\inline{find more citations for AOBPM}


\subsection{MAML \& SWARM}
\inline{Is MAML/SWARM really modelling, or simulation? Simulation, right?}


\subsection{}


% \section{Aspect Orientation \& Simulation}\label{sec:ao_and_simulation}
\labelledsec{Aspect Orientation \& Simulation}{ao_and_simulation}

\inline{The simulation section \emph{badly} needs revisiting.}

Surprisingly, little literature exists pertaining specifically to the use of
aspect-orientation in a simulation context. Aspect orientation is often applied
to modelling as discussed in \cref{sec:ao_and_modelling}, used to compose a perspective of the world from individual
parts, but in a way which isn't necessarily executable or able to produce data.

Early in the history of aspect orientation as an emerging paradigm, there was
some interest in its use for scientific simulation. \cite{gulyas1999use} discuss
that computer simulations require code for both observation of a simulation and
the simulation itself, and that misuse of this could cause what is in effect a
kind of Hawthorne Effect\inline{does hawthorne effect need a citation?}, where
the inclusion of observation code intertwined with simulation code might
influence the outcome of an experiment. They suggest that improving simulation
technologies could combat this approach. Aspect Orientation, being developed
specifically with obliviousness in mind, is an ideal candidate which
\citeauthor{gulyas1999use} identify.

Much of the literature concerning aspect-oriented programming and simulation
focus on tooling support for aspect-oriented simulation, rather than
investigations into its efficacy. For example, attempts have been made to
integrate aspect orientation into new
tools~\cite{DEVSaspectorientation2008aksu}~\inline{throw more in here from
excel}, or into existing ones~\cite{chibani2019using}\inline{throw more in here
from excel}. \inline{Rethink the argument around AOP and sim in the lit. The
angle is, ``much of the lit strays from any kind of real-world testing of sim
tech --- why?''}

Some experiments specifically using aspect orientation in the implementation of
process-based simulations also exist\cite{Ionescu_2009}~\inline{include more!}. For
example, \citeauthor{Ionescu_2009} apply aspect orientation in a nuclear
disaster prevention simulation. Their motivation is that code can become complex
to maintain over time and changes to the scientific zeitgeist or to regulatory
requirements become costly as technical debt mounts. Aspect orientation
therefore allows developers to separate functionality into distinct modules more
easily, without disturbing the underlying codebase.

\subsection{Aspect-oriented L-Systems}
Aspect-orientation is also applied in other simulation paradigms.
\citeauthor{Cieslak_2011} investigated the use of aspect orientation in L-system
based simulations~\cite{Cieslak_2011}. An L-system\cite{lindenmayer1968lsystem}
is defined by a set of symbols, an initial string composed of these symbols, and
a set of rules for rewriting substrings. While being a powerful tool for
representing fractal structures, they were originally conceived of for plant
modelling (and still see the most use in this field).

\citeauthor{Cieslak_2011} note that some details of plant modelling are actually
cross-cutting concerns against many plants or families of plants. To represent
these, they introduce a new language to describe plant models which makes use of
aspect orientation to represent these cross-cutting concerns. They test the
approach by representing carbon dynamics, apical dominance and biomechanics as
cross-cutting concerns that are integrated into a previously published model of
kiwifruit shoot development. \citeauthor{Cieslak_2011} hope that these
cross-cutting concerns might work in other models too, but this is untested. The
use of an aspect in a new model, when developed for another, seems untested in
the community's literature writ large and is a noted omission in the conclusion
of this particular work.
